map-data-processing/01_download-nls-elevation-model-2m/README.md, before:

# National land survey of Finland (NLS) elevation model 2m x 2m

## Script [01_download_model_from_kapsi_fi.sh](./01_download_model_from_kapsi_fi.sh)

Script downloads [elevation model 2m x 2m](https://www.maanmittauslaitos.fi/en/maps-and-spatial-data/datasets-and-interfaces/product-descriptions/elevation-model-2-m) from [National land survey of Finland (NLS)](https://www.maanmittauslaitos.fi/en) to `./mml` folder.

Map data is downloaded with rsync from [Kapsi Internet-users association](https://kartat.kapsi.fi/) web page that provides rsync support. It is easier to use in scripts that NLS official [file service](https://asiointi.maanmittauslaitos.fi/karttapaikka/tiedostopalvelu/korkeusmalli?lang=en) (because it requires manual selections in web page UI) or NLS [Web Coverage Service (WCS)](https://avoin-karttakuva.maanmittauslaitos.fi/ortokuvat-ja-korkeusmallit/wcs/v2?service=WCS&request=GetCapabilities) (because it requires logic for tile subset calcuations). Kapsi provices files in NLS [map sheet division](https://www.maanmittauslaitos.fi/en/maps-and-spatial-data/datasets-and-interfaces/product-descriptions/map-sheet-division) (see [map](https://kartta.paikkatietoikkuna.fi/?zoomLevel=6&coord=378675.588828541_6674753.274792547&mapLayers=801+100+default,1240+100+default&uuid=90246d84-3958-fd8c-cb2c-2510cccca1d3&noSavedState=true&showIntro=false)):

![NLS map sheet division screenshot](./nls-map-sheet-division-screenshot.png "NLS map sheet division screenshot")

These script download elevation model for whole Finland (see [map-sheets-to-download-whole-Finland.txt](./map-sheets-to-download-whole-Finland.txt)):

```
X4/X43
X5/X51
X5/X52
W3/W33
W4/W41
W4/W43
W4/W44
W5/W51
W5/W52
V3/V34
V4
V5
U4
U5
T4
T5
S4
S5
R4
R5
Q3
Q4
Q5
P3
P4
P5
P6
N3
N4
N5
N6
M3
M4
M5
L2
L3
L4
L5
K3
K4
```

Every map sheet is divided in multiple levels of sub sheets. For example T4 --> T43 --> T432 --> T4323 --> T4323C --> T4323C4. Files are downloaded in "T4323C" level.

## Script [02_build_nls_vrt.sh](./02_build_nls_vrt.sh)

Script groups files into [GDAL Virtual Format (VRT)](https://gdal.org/en/stable/drivers/raster/vrt.html) files by highest map sheet level (T4, S4, P3 etc.) to `./vrt` folder. This allows to use the files easily in following processings steps. It also provides natural split to parallelize computing.

Script crates two set of VRTs:

- One that contains data for the whole Finland. This required for 6000 BC and beyond calculations.
- Another that contains only coastal areas of Finland for calcluations for 5500 BC - 1500 AD. This limited set is used to speed up processing and to reduce final file size.

## Projection

NLS elevation model projection is [`EPSG:3067`](https://epsg.io/3067-1149) (ETRS-TM35FIN).

## Licence

NLS elevation model licence is [CC BY 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.en).

## Commands

Execute all the scripts by single command:

```bash
./run_all.sh
```

Commit message:

Download NLS elevation model from CSC Paituli service instead of Kapsi, because Kapsi contains older data.

map-data-processing/01_download-nls-elevation-model-2m/README.md, after:

# National land survey of Finland (NLS) elevation model 2m x 2m

## Script [01_download_elevation_model.sh](./01_download_elevation_model.sh)

Script downloads [elevation model 2m x 2m](https://www.maanmittauslaitos.fi/en/maps-and-spatial-data/datasets-and-interfaces/product-descriptions/elevation-model-2-m) from [National land survey of Finland (NLS)](https://www.maanmittauslaitos.fi/en).

Map data is downloaded with rsync from [CSC – IT Center for Science](https://csc.fi/en/) organization [Paituli spatial data download service](https://paituli.csc.fi/files.html). It is easier to use rsync than NLS official [file service](https://asiointi.maanmittauslaitos.fi/karttapaikka/tiedostopalvelu/korkeusmalli?lang=en) (because it requires manual selections in web page UI) or NLS [Web Coverage Service (WCS)](https://avoin-karttakuva.maanmittauslaitos.fi/ortokuvat-ja-korkeusmallit/wcs/v2?service=WCS&request=GetCapabilities) (because it requires custom logic for tile subset calcuations). Paituli provices files in NLS [map sheet division](https://www.maanmittauslaitos.fi/en/maps-and-spatial-data/datasets-and-interfaces/product-descriptions/map-sheet-division) (see [map](https://kartta.paikkatietoikkuna.fi/?zoomLevel=6&coord=378675.588828541_6674753.274792547&mapLayers=801+100+default,1240+100+default&uuid=90246d84-3958-fd8c-cb2c-2510cccca1d3&noSavedState=true&showIntro=false)):

![NLS map sheet division screenshot](./nls-map-sheet-division-screenshot.png "NLS map sheet division screenshot")

These script download elevation model for whole Finland (see [map-sheets-to-download-whole-Finland.txt](./map-sheets-to-download-whole-Finland.txt)):

```
X4/X43
X5/X51
X5/X52
W3/W33
W4/W41
W4/W43
W4/W44
W5/W51
W5/W52
V3/V34
V4
V5
U4
U5
T4
T5
S4
S5
R4
R5
Q3
Q4
Q5
P3
P4
P5
P6
N3
N4
N5
N6
M3
M4
M5
L2
L3
L4
L5
K3
K4
```

Every map sheet is divided in multiple levels of sub sheets. For example T4 --> T43 --> T432 --> T4323 --> T4323C --> T4323C4. Files are downloaded at the lowest level.

## Script [02_build_nls_vrt.sh](./02_build_nls_vrt.sh)

Script groups files into [GDAL Virtual Format (VRT)](https://gdal.org/en/stable/drivers/raster/vrt.html) files by highest map sheet level (T4, S4, P3 etc.) to `./vrt` folder. This allows to use the files easily in following processings steps. It also provides natural split to parallelize computing.

Script crates two set of VRTs:

- One that contains data for the whole Finland. This required for 6000 BC and beyond calculations.
- Another that contains only coastal areas of Finland for calcluations for 5500 BC - 1500 AD. This limited set is used to speed up processing and to reduce final file size.

## Projection

NLS elevation model projection is [`EPSG:3067`](https://epsg.io/3067-1149) (ETRS-TM35FIN).

## Licence

NLS elevation model licence is [CC BY 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.en).

## Commands

Execute all the scripts by single command:

```bash
./run_all.sh
```
